What I've learnt as a first time manager (Archived 2008)
posted Sep 21, 2012, 11:40 PM by vivek kodira   [ updated Oct 16, 2012, 9:11 PM ]
There have been many lessons but I'll stick to the ones I can substantiate with examples. Most are 'duh' kinds but then like Cathy Sierra says in ['Why "duh" isn't'](http://headrush.typepad.com/creating_passionate_users/2006/09/why_duh_isnt.html), there is often a difference in what we think is obvious we should do and what we actually do. 

1. Get Feedback: The first month in the project was a hard one. I was asked for help with (what I thought were) trivial problems and asked doubts I hadn't expected to have to answer. At one stage, we finally had a meeting in which we discussed this. What I realised was that the problem wasn't so much inexperience or unwillingness, as much as a lack of time. People weren't reading the emails I'd been sending because they were getting way too many. We arrived at the solution of using a Teamwiki. The team took a while to adopt to this but there has been a marked improvement from before.  (2012: My first brush with Teamwiki. We went on to build what I think is the best Teamwiki the organization has to date)

2. Encourage innovation/usage of Tools: The onsite team was responsible for this one. We'd been spending hours copy-pasting URLs from one browser window to another to do our testing. Steven and Simon researched and found Canoo - a tool that automates functional testing. We took almost 2 weeks to accept it but once we did, we were very glad :). I think we've saved at least 1 hour everyday per developer in the last 6 months. And moreover, we now have a repeatable suite of tests that a developer runs in a minute to sanity test the entire application. (2012: Find it funny now to look back and find this. I'm the evangelist for automation these days :))

3. Set Expectations: At the appraisal meeting I had with one developer, this was a topic we disagreed on. I told him I thought his teamwork inadequate. I'd expected him to be more proactive in taking responsibilities, volunteer for tasks that were thrown open to the team or help other teammates when they voiced concerns in SCRUM meetings, etc. His contention was that he'd reported problems to me, his manager, on time and that he'd done the tasks I'd assigned him on time. He felt this constituted teamwork. Initially, I refused to accept his explanation but the more I thought about it, the more I saw it from his point of view. When I was a developer, I too had a hard time understanding that the 'team' didn't just constitute me and my module lead. I was frequently counselled about interacting more with others and for a long time completely ignored this advice. 

One initiative that has helped us become more of a team have been SCRUM meetings. It should, I feel, be the responsibility of the module lead to ensure everyone feels a part of the team. He/She should do this at the beginning of the project along with detailing what other things he expects to see (like being on time, giving frequent status updates, etc). We should not assume a developer will know what we expect of him/her. 

4. Don't try to please everyone: This has been the hardest lesson to learn. I've learnt now to NOT answer questions unless I feel that sufficient research has been done prior to approaching me. Answering every question you are asked eventually makes the developer lazy or unwilling to research. The approach I use these days is to ask another question back and eventually make the answer obvious. This is often not an option when you are in a time-crunch but should otherwise, I think, be adopted for all questions. There have also been instances where I've told someone I'm not happy with their technical know-how, their timeliness or the quality of their work. I would earlier have been worried about giving such feedback - the difference is that now I think of it as my duty to them. 

5. Don't over-mingle: This is a difficult one 'cause it seems wrong at first glance. Hierarchy, for its own sake, is a bad thing, but I see over and over again instances of leads/managers going overboard and losing their teammates' respect. Moreover, personal relationships are difficult when you have to appraise an individual and he/she happens to be your friend. (2012: No longer think this one is true. Keeping it anyway)

6. Delegate: A difficult one again. I do not want to delegate tasks that I 'ought' to be doing nor do I want to delegate tasks I consider boring. What has worked in my case is delegating responsibilities instead of tasks. It helps to groom developers into potential managers and gives them an idea of the difficulties involved in being responsible for ensuring something gets done right. Also helps tell them that you consider them good enough to be doing this independently.